Cambridge English readers, starter level, The Black Pearls by Richard McCandrew, published
by Cambridge University Press. This recording is copyright.
The Black Pearls by Richard McCandrew
Chapter 1 Who is Wolfgang Peters?
This is the man, says Janet Hunter, and she puts a photo on the table. Janet Hunter is a police inspector from New Zealand.
She's in the police station on Rauratonga, one of the Cook Islands in the Pacific Ocean.
What's his name?
asks to Nui Epatty. Epatty is an inspector in the Cook Islands police.
His name is Wolfgang Peters, she answers. Some people call him the minute man.
Why? Epatty asks. Because one minute he's there, and the next minute he's not, answers Hunter.
Epatty smiles.
And why do you want him? Epatty asks. He looks at the photo.
He steals, answers Hunter. He takes things, often from museums. People tell him what they want.
Then he steals for them, and he gets very good money for his work.
What kind of things does he take? asks Epatty.
Anything? answers Hunter. A Faberge egg from a museum in Virginia, in the United States.
A Picasso painting from a museum in St. Petersburg, in Russia.
And then this year, an old book from a museum in Auckland, in New Zealand.
It's the only one in the world. That's why I'm after him.
I see, says Epatty.
Peters is very good, says Hunter. But I want him, and I'm going to get him.
And he's coming here? To Rada Tonga? asks Epatty.
Yes, says Hunter. We, the New Zealand police, think he's going to steal something here.
Ah, says Epatty.
Then I know what, I think.
Epatty takes down a book and opens it. Hunter watches him.
Many Cook Islanders are big people. Epatty is big.
He gives Hunter the book. It's open at a photo of a beautiful necklace of black pearls.
That is the Manihiki necklace, says Epatty.
It's from the island of Manihiki.
Manihiki is a thousand kilometers from Rada Tonga, but it's one of the Cook Islands too.
Hunter looks at the necklace.
It's beautiful, she says.
Yes, says Epatty. And over a hundred years old, those are black pearls.
They're not easy to find. You only get them in Tahiti and here in the Cook Islands.
Hunter looks up at Epatty.
The necklace is in the museum here, says Epatty.
People from all over the world come to see it.
He takes the photo of Peters from the table.
Can I have this photo? He asks.
Of course, answers Hunter. Then she says,
Peters is coming here this morning on a plane from Tahiti.
I want to watch him and try and get him. But is that okay with you?
After all, this is your island.
That's okay, says Epatty.
Do you want any help? We have some good people in the Cook Islands police.
Thank you, says Hunter. But not now. I can call you.
Of course, says Epatty. Call me by five o'clock.
Okay, says Hunter. They go out of the police station.
Which hotel are you in? Asks Epatty.
The water side in? Answers Hunter.
Good hotel, says Epatty.
Is this your first time in the Cook Islands?
Yes, says Hunter. It's very beautiful here.
Well, thank you for your help, Inspector. I must get to the airport by eleven o'clock.
Chapter Two. Watching Peters.
A lot of people are waiting in front of the airport.
What are all these people doing, thinks Hunter?
She walks across and speaks to a Cook Islands woman.
Why is everyone here? She asks.
Kate Watson is coming, the woman answers.
You know, the Kate Watson. She's in a lot of Hollywood films.
Oh, her, says Hunter.
Is she making a film here? She asks.
Yes, but she's only on the island for two or three days.
Hunter waits next to the woman for a minute or two.
Then she goes to her car.
At about eleven forty-five, Wolfgang Peters comes out of the airport.
He's a short man with dark hair.
Hunter watches from her car.
Peters finds a taxi and gets in.
The taxi drives away. Hunter drives behind it.
After fifteen minutes, the taxi stops at the water side in,
and Peters gets out with his bags.
That's good, thinks Hunter.
He's at this hotel too. It's going to be easy to watch him.
She sits in her car across the street and waits.
At one thirty, Peters comes out of the hotel.
A taxi is waiting. Peters gets in and the taxi drives away.
Hunter is behind them.
Peters' taxi takes him to the museum.
He gets out and walks into the museum.
Hunter leaves her car and goes in too.
The museum is small.
There are a lot of interesting things from the Cook Islands
and from Tahiti, Tonga and Fiji.
Hunter looks at some old bags and jackets from the Cook Islands,
but she watches Peters too.
He's looking at the money he can necklace.
After a minute or two, he looks across the room.
Hunter turns and walks over to a boat from the time of Captain Cook.
She doesn't want Peters to see her.
Peters looks at the necklace again.
Then he leaves the museum.
Hunter waits five minutes.
Then she too leaves and goes to the water side in.
Chapter 3. At CJ's Cafe
Peters is here, says Hunter.
It's six o'clock in the evening.
She's sitting with Tanui Ipati at CJ's Cafe.
They're looking out over the water.
And he is going to steal the money he can necklace.
Well, says Ipati, we can stop him.
I can get some police officers to watch the necklace all the time.
Or we can try and get him with the necklace.
I want to get him with the necklace, says Hunter.
But it's not going to be easy.
He is very good at his job.
I can put some police officers in the museum, says Ipati, where Peters can't see them.
You can, says Hunter, but they're not going to get him, asks Ipati.
Hunter smiles.
The police never do, she says.
Well, says Ipati.
He's at the water side in.
We can look for the necklace in his room.
You can try looking in his room too, says Hunter.
But he never has the things with him.
Virginia, St. Petersburg, Auckland, the police never find anything.
But she stops and thinks.
He has a plane ticket to Tahiti the day after tomorrow.
And he's not going to leave the necklace here in Raritonga.
No, Ipati says.
Peters isn't working for a Cook Islander.
No one here has that much money.
Peters is going to have the necklace with him at the airport.
We can get him there.
And no police officers in the museum?
Ask Hunter?
No, says Ipati.
Ipati and Hunter leave CJ's cafe.
Across the street, a lot of people are waiting in front of the Itutaki restaurant.
Some police officers are there too.
A car drives up and two women get out.
The first has long red hair and is very beautiful.
Hunter knows her face from films and papers.
People shout, Kate! Kate!
How are you, Kate?
Do you like Raritonga, Kate?
The second woman has dark hair.
She's beautiful too.
Hunter looks at Ipati.
Who's the woman with dark hair? She asks.
Maria Gomez answers Ipati.
She's in the Kate Watson film too.
She's not famous now, but people say she's the next big thing.
The women smile and go into the restaurant.
Ipati looks at Hunter.
Hollywood comes to Raritonga, he says, with a small smile.
It's all work for me.
Chapter 4
Who takes the necklace?
At 9 o'clock the next morning, the museum is opening.
Hunter is sitting in her car.
She's watching the front door of the museum.
After five minutes, Ipati comes out and walks across to her.
The people at the museum understand, says Ipati.
They know about Peter's and they're not going to try and stop him.
Okay, says Hunter.
Well, says Ipati.
I'm leaving.
We don't want Peter's to see any police officers here.
And I've got work to do.
What are you going to do?
I'm just going to wait here in the car for now and watch, says Hunter.
Okay.
Ipati gets in his car and drives away.
People come and go in and out of the museum.
Then, at about 1130, a taxi drives up and a woman with long dark hair gets out.
She has a bag in one hand.
She looks at Hunter's car and then walks into the museum fast.
Hunter watches the woman.
Something's wrong, she thinks.
I don't think that's a woman.
She gets out of her car fast.
There's a noise from the museum and a lot of shouting.
She runs to the museum, but people are running out with their hands over their faces.
Hunter tries to get in, but she can't.
She runs to the back door.
It's open.
Two people from the museum come out.
The necklace shouts one.
It's not there.
Chapter 5.
Peters knows nothing.
The minute man says Ipati.
Yes, says Hunter.
There one minute knocked the next.
Or this time, he's the minute woman.
It's six o'clock in the evening and they're drinking coconut water at the water side in.
What does Peters say?
asks Hunter.
Nothing answers Ipati.
Three hours of questions this afternoon and no answers from him.
He's not the woman at the museum, asks Hunter.
Her mouth smiles, but not her eyes.
He says not, says Ipati.
Of course, says Hunter.
And what about his room here?
No necklace, says Ipati.
No long dark hair, nothing.
Then why is he in raretonga?
asks Hunter.
She smiles again.
He says he's just enjoying our beautiful island, says Ipati.
Lots of good food and friendly people.
Where is he now?
asks Hunter.
Here, in the restaurant, eating and drinking.
Ipati laughs.
And this evening, there's some Cook Islands dancing at the hotel.
He's going to watch that because he tells me he loves dancing.
He's good, says Hunter.
Very good, says Ipati.
Ipati looks at Hunter.
Do you like dancing?
He asks.
I do now, she answers.
I want to watch Peters.
At nine o'clock, Hunter leaves her room and goes down to the restaurant.
She hears a lot of noise and shouting.
Kate! Kate!
Are you here for the dancing?
Do you like Cook Islands dancing?
Kate Watson comes into the hotel.
Maria Gomez is with her.
Hunter walks into the restaurant behind them.
In the restaurant, Kate Watson and Maria Gomez sit at the front.
Hunter looks for Peters.
He is sitting behind Kate Watson.
The dancing starts.
Men, women, boys and girls, all with flowers in their hair.
Beautiful dances to beautiful music.
Everyone enjoys it.
The dancing finishes at 10.30, and everyone gets up to leave.
People go to the restaurant doors.
Hunter waits and watches.
Peters speaks to one or two people.
Then he goes to the doors.
Watson and Gomez are leaving too.
Hunter can just see their heads.
Peters is just in front of them.
Kate Watson says something to him.
He turns and smiles, but says nothing.
People out on the street are shouting,
Kate! Kate!
Hunter watches Peters.
He turns left to his room.
Kate Watson and Maria Gomez go out of the hotel and get into a car.
Chapter 6.
At the airport.
It's ten o'clock in the morning,
and Hunter and Aparti are at the airport.
They're watching people.
Two planes are leaving this morning.
One to Tahiti, one to Los Angeles.
Across the room,
Hunter sees Kate Watson and Maria Gomez.
Someone behind them has their bags.
There's a lot of noise.
The women are late for their plane.
An airport worker looks at their tickets,
and then they run to the plane.
After two or three minutes,
Hunter and Aparti see Peters.
They run over and stop him.
Excuse me, Mr Peters.
Says Aparti.
Can I look in your bags, please?
Of course, says Peters.
Aparti takes the two bags from Peters.
He starts looking in one bag.
Hunter takes out Peters' computer and opens it.
I don't have that necklace, you know, says Peters to Aparti.
I know nothing about it.
Aparti finishes looking in Peters' bag.
Nothing here, he says to Hunter.
Then he looks at Peters.
Okay, he says, put your arms up.
He tries Peters jacket, his trousers, everywhere.
Hunter watches Peters face.
He doesn't have the necklace.
She just knows it.
She looks at his computer.
Is there something here?
She thinks.
Aparti turns to Hunter.
Nothing, he says again.
Hunter looks up.
She thinks for a minute and walks away from Peters a little.
Aparti goes with her.
Peters steals things for people, says Hunter.
Then they give him money.
She looks at Aparti.
Someone wants the money he can necklace.
They ask Peters and he steals it for them.
He gives them the necklace.
They give him the money.
She starts to speak fast now.
But how much money?
She asks Aparti.
$100,000?
$200,000?
Aparti doesn't answer.
No one in Rura Tonga has that much money.
We know that, she says.
Then she puts a hand to her head.
Of course, she says,
Kate Watson.
She looks at Aparti.
Her plane, she asks.
But Aparti has his phone out.
This is Inspector Aparti, he says.
The plane to Los Angeles must not leave.
It must not leave.
Get everyone off the plane and into the airport now.
Aparti puts his phone away.
I'm going to speak to Kate Watson, he says to Hunter.
Okay, says Hunter.
And I'm going to try and find something on this computer.
Aparti goes up to Peters.
You come with me, he says.
Chapter 7.
Finding the answers.
At 12 o'clock, Aparti is sitting in a room at the airport.
Peters and Kate Watson are there,
and two police officers are next to Watson's bags.
Kate Watson is angry.
I tell you, I don't know this man.
And I don't know anything about a necklace, she shouts.
And just look at my bags.
You can't leave them like that.
I'm not going to forget this, you know.
Just then, the door opens.
It's a police officer.
He's with Maria Gomez.
And he has a small bag.
Excuse me, Inspector.
He says, we've got this from the plane under seat 3A.
Where Ms. Gomez is sitting.
Everyone in the room looks at Maria Gomez.
Her face goes white.
The police officer opens the bag and puts something on the table.
The money he can necklace.
Everyone looks at it.
I don't understand, says Maria Gomez.
Her face now goes red.
I know nothing about this.
Just then, Peters gets up.
Well, you have your woman, Inspector.
I can go now, he says.
But Hunter is by the open door with Peters' computer.
Sit down, Peters, she says.
You're not going anywhere.
Hunter puts the computer on the table and turns it to a party.
Computers are funny things, Peters, she says.
It's easy to put something on a computer, but it's never easy to take it off.
Let e-mail from your bank.
Not easy for me to find, but very interesting.
Eppity reads the e-mail and smiles.
From ATM Bank, Geneva.
To Wolfgang Peters.
W Peters at crimco.org.
ATMG, Wolfgang Peters.
988-456-7543-108.
Money from KW Films.
$250,000.
Thank you, Inspector Hunter, says Eppity.
That's very good work.
Hunter looks at Kate Watson.
And KW Films, she says.
Is that Maria Gomez films?
Or is it Kate Watson films?
Kate Watson looks across at Peters.
Her eyes are dark and angry.
You stupid man, she says.
You stupid, stupid man.
Here's the beginning of another book at this level.
A Death in Oxford, by Richard McCandrew.
Chapter 1.
Friday, 26th July, 6.30 am.
It's 6.30 in the morning.
Inspector Frank Williams of the Oxford Police is in bed.
He hears his phone and answers it.
Williams, he says.
It's Kate Miller, Inspector.
I'm at 17B St John Street.
The House of a Doctor Janet Layton.
She's dead.
I'm coming, says Williams.
Give me 15 minutes.
At 6.45, Williams walks into the front room of a tall house on St John Street.
He stops.
There are books and papers everywhere, and a body next to the coffee table.
Sergeant Kate Miller is by the window.
She's waiting for him.
There's a police scientist in the room too.
What's all this? asks Williams.
Someone wanting money or things to sell, I think, says Miller.
This is Doctor Layton's computer table, but there's no computer.
And there's her bag.
Williams looks down at the body.
It's the body of a 50-year-old woman.
Dark trousers and a white shirt with a lot of red.
Miller speaks again.
And there's this.
In her hand is a bag, and in the bag is a knife.
Oh, says Williams.
He looks slowly at the room again.
He looks at the Chinese dog.
He turns it over.
What do you think, Sergeant?
He asks.
Someone gets into the house to take things, she says.
Doctor Layton tries to stop them.
But maybe there's a knife on the table, and she stops speaking.
Williams says nothing for a minute.
He looks at the Chinese dog again.
I don't know, says Williams.
He turns to the police scientist.
Jenkins, he says, can I have a photograph of this dog?
Okay, Inspector, says the scientist.
Williams looks at the book on the coffee table.
Our beautiful world.
He reads the name of the book.
Photographs from all over the world.
There's a receipt by the book.
He looks at that.
It's a new book, too, he says.
Next, Williams looks at the papers on the computer table.
One is a letter.
He reads it.
Interesting, he says.
It's about Doctor Layton's will from her lawyer.
I want to know about her will.
Now she's dead.
Who gets her money?
Her husband?
Children?
Miller comes over and reads the letter.
The lawyer's name is Elizabeth Morgan of Morgan and Free Body Lawyers, she says.
We can talk to her this morning.
Yes, says Williams, but first I want to see a Doctor Barbara Collins.
Miller looks at Williams, but he turns to the scientist.
Jenkins, can you come and see me this afternoon?
Okay, Inspector, says the scientist.
You can tell me all about this room then, says Williams, and about the knife.
Williams turns to Miller.
Okay, Sergeant, we can go.
Whose Doctor Barbara Collins asks Miller?
Williams and Miller are in Williams' car.
They are driving up the Woodstock Road.
It's a beautiful Oxford street with trees and houses to the left and the right.
You're new in Oxford, I know, says Williams.
But don't you read the Oxford Post?
I don't have time, answers Miller.
Williams turns left into French Road and stops in front of a big house.
He looks at Miller and smiles.
Well, a lot of people in Oxford know Doctor Collins and Doctor Layton.